LAHORE: PML-Q leaders Chaudhry Shujaat Husaain and Chaudhry Parvez Elahi Sunday said the party workers would be reorganized under the party flag.The PML-Q leaders stated this while addressing the provincial convention of the party at the Muslim League House.

 

The convention was attended by office-bearers, assemblies’ members and ticket holders from all districts and tehsils of the province. The participants lauded services of the Chaudhrys for the party and the country. They said the people still remember revolutionary steps undertaken by the government of Parvez Elahi for the welfare and well-being of the poor and minorities in the province.

 

They said the PML-Q’s importance should be realized.The convention was attended by lawmakers and the party’s leaders including Senator Kamil Ali Agha, Tariq Bashir Cheema, Zain Elahi, Chaudhry Zaheeruddin Khan, Dr Khalid Ranjha, Moonis Elahi, Waqas Hassan Mokal, Muhammad Shah Khagga, Ahmad Yaar Heraj, Chaudhry Anwar Bhinder, Rana Zahid Tauseef, Rana Asif Tauseef, Dr Azeemuddin Lakhvi, Ghias Ahmad Mela, Hafiz Ammar Yasir, Bao Rizwan, Qamar Hayat Kathia and others.

 

Shujaat and Parvez said the rulers are reluctant to hold local bodies’ polls because of anger of the people over their defective policies.They asked the party workers to maintain and strengthen unity among their ranks and become active and organize at the union council level and fully participate in the reorganization of the party. They said colleagues of today were the precious asset of the party and they would always be given importance.

 

They said we would keep our allies parties with us, think tanks comprising senior leaders would be formed at the national and provincial levels.They said the role and great sacrifices of the Pakistan Army in the defense of the frontiers besides Zarb-e-Azb were quite laudable and their party would continue to fully support it.

 

They said the workers conventions of the PML would be held in every district after Muharram in which first priority will be given to reorganization at the basic level. About various office-bearers saying that in every area other parties’ leaders and ticket holders wanted to join the PML, they said they would be welcomed in the party fold.They said mass contact campaign would be launched soon. 