When I read Samuel P Huntington?s essay on the clash of civilisations some ten odd years ago, I took umbrage primarily with the author?s decidedly pejorative depiction of Islam and Muslims.

I felt that, in his formulation of the thesis of civilisational antagonisms, with Islam taking the place of apex troublemaker, the author in the same breath managed to somewhat smugly portray western civilisation ? its ingredient culture, politics, economics et al ? as the virtuous ideal for any truly civilised peoples. By implication Islam and Muslims were categorised as being incapable of achieving such an ideal.

The following two decades of war in the Middle East and now the emergence of Isil with its pan-Islamic agenda for the establishment of a Muslim caliphate, scholars and governments and foreign policy makers in the west have proposed that Professor Huntington?s prognosis, far from being outdated, remains ominously current: that Islam has bloody borders, that the civilisation of Islam is decidedly anti-modernity, anti-liberalism, anti-democracy; and because these characteristics embody western civilisation, Islam is thus diametrically opposed to, and in constant violent antagonism with, the west.

These ?civilisational fault line conflicts? Professor Huntington posits are ?intermittent? and form part of longer ?civilisational fault line wars? that are ?interminable?. He predicts they will last through the 21st century and end only in a state of cold war or cold peace. Rereading Professor Huntington?s work today, while I retain my original disagreement, I?m intrigued by the questions he poses and find most if not all his answers compelling; in some areas, however, his argument can be logically countered as well.

Are Islam?s borders bloody? It is true that since 1979 Muslims have been continuously engaged in armed conflict against non-Muslim states, and across the Muslim world these conflicts have been labelled ?holy wars?. The war against the Soviets in Afghanistan was the first and was followed by the first and second Gulf wars, which were eventually, if not at the outset, described by Muslim states and their populations as western imperial aggression against Islam and not just Iraq. The spectacle of the coalition forces invading Iraq for a second time drew parallels in the Arab press with the Crusading Christian hordes of antiquity, much as the Israeli-Palestinian wars are described in the Muslim world primarily as a faith based conflict as opposed to a political one.

Even as these major conflicts have continued over the course of two decades and even further back, together with the smaller conflicts that have accompanied them such as the Muslim-Christian Sudanese civil war and the Bosnian conflict, Muslim states with burgeoning populations and weak economies, from the Maghreb to the Gulf and from the Gulf to the Subcontinent, either became hatcheries of terrorism or found themselves engaged in intra-state conflict to combat non-state actors working on a militant agenda to overthrow their own governments, and establish pure Islamic Shariah states with declared anti-west foreign policies.

But most of these conflicts were engineered by the west for the pursuit of what can only be termed as its global hegemonic interests in a post-colonial world. And as the scholar Reza Aslan argues, to view them in isolation and forget that the 20th century also hosted two of the bloodiest world wars waged over ideological secular differences, and which in their wake spawned bloody ideological regimes of repression ? Stalinism, Mao?s cultural revolution, Ceausescu?s brutalities in Romania, Pol Pot?s agrarian socialist utopia ? to in effect relegate these conflicts, in comparison, to the importance of bar room brawls and family squabbles (which the anti-Islam camp all too often does) is just plainly disingenuous.

Is Islam anti-liberal and anti-democracy? Since it prohibits separation of religion and state Islam is certainly opposed to the liberal democratic model, where the sacred and profane are by default, mutually exclusive. The separation of Church and state and the various reformations of Christianity, have, in the west, diluted the impact of religion on society and neutered the ability of the Church and any and all religious groups to enforce religious observance. Violent punishment is simply outlawed. Critical questioning, debate and interpretations of scripture are common practice and the emphatically secular ethos of the west enables even the critique of the holiest of concepts.

Conversely, at least in Saudi Arabia and Iran, such a critique would likely be construed as blasphemy and suffer severe penalties including lethal punishment; aside from these states the solution offered by fundamentalists for all non-believers, infidels and blasphemers is only violent punishment. In Pakistan, while cases of blasphemy to date have not resulted in convictions for the offenders by courts of law, they have generated sufficient controversy and extra judicial killings by extremist groups.

But whereas we may acknowledge the discomfiture of Islam with the Western liberal democratic model and concede that it makes no allowance for a reformation, Muslim populations in practice have favoured democratic models of governance. Turkey, Indonesia, Malaysia and even Pakistan are examples and the Arab Spring, while it did fail, demonstrated at least the existence of a consciousness within Arab Muslims of the repression they had endured, together with a unified desire to embrace liberal democracy. And in the 20th century Muslim states have, despite being labelled misogynist, elected more women heads of state than the entire Christian west.

Is Islam anti-modernity? While the narrative peddled by fundamentalists is categorically anti-modern, Muslim populations in contrast, across the world, have exhibited a partiality to modern western society and culture and technology. Nevertheless in the wake of the Afghan wars, the Gulf conflicts, 9/11 and also for economic reasons, a string of connected Islamic welfare organisations, mosques, formal and informal centres of Islamic learning and sectarian militant and pacifist outfits have created networks of influence, not only across Muslim states but penetrating also into the Muslim diaspora residing in the west. Their objective is the promotion of unadulterated Islamic values, culture, faith practice and a sense of Muslim unity across countries and continents, with the underlined requirement for all Muslims to eschew western liberal social and political values.

The outcome is the inculcation in Muslims of a desire to redefine modernity, in a singularly Islamic cultural and religious form. But fundamentalists reside on the periphery of Islamic political thought and it is absurd hokum to imagine that the 1.5 billion Muslims across the world all singularly advocate violent solutions to matters of political, social and economic importance.

What, then, is the prognosis for Pakistan? With the complicity of the establishment, and as a result of a string of governance failures by politicians, the answers to the prickly question of a Pakistani identity have since the 70s been fashioned singularly through the agency of both militant and pacifist Islamic institutions. Within our society this has nurtured a puerile narrative that is an amalgam of religion, ignorance and confusion. Increasingly we are intolerant, increasingly our youth are assuming hard-line positions on questions concerning culture, society, politics and religion, increasingly our thinkers, probers, scientists and intellectuals are abandoning Pakistan, and increasingly we are overwhelmed with the momentum of mediocrity and a culture of ignorance.

Unrelenting in their agendas of control, the powers that be promote an atmosphere that puts us psychologically in a state of siege; a battle-ready Pakistan perceived constantly to be under threat from imperial powers and our erstwhile neighbour, with whom we have shared a ?bloody border? ? in effect a ?civilisational fault line?. We stand thus at the crossroads of our future and are faced with a choice: to either consciously and proactively take serious measures to halt this continual slide into radicalisation or embrace a future that will, for the better part of our lives and those of our children, be a very dark one.

