Once the Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) members including its chief Imran Khan visit Speaker National Assembly Sardar Ayaz Sadiq on Wednesday for verification of their resignations, it would amount to recognition of his (speaker) elected status by them.

 

The speaker will not hear the PTI’s 26 members collectively since it has been made clear to them that they would be asked to appear before him individually for verification of the letters of resignation received by him. Well placed sources told The News here Sunday that various political forces and parties have started working to stall the move made by the PTI for stepping out of the Parliament as they are of the view that such development could generate another crisis that wouldn’t be useful for the system and democracy. The government isn’t resisting the move but the parliamentary groups sitting in the National Assembly are opposing the idea and they have already impressed upon Imran Khan to withdraw the move. It appears that Imran Khan is adamant to come out of the Parliament although his members are privately opposing it but the party discipline has forced them to act upon the advice of Imran Khan. The PTI had 34 members initially in the National Assembly. Makhdoom Javed Hashmi was the first who quit the House and his resignation was accepted in the open session of the National Assembly. Three members publicly revolted and declined to resign while four members addressed their resignation paper to the chairman of the party and accordingly Speaker Ayaz Sadiq rejected the plea of the members. Now he has written letters to 26 members to appear before him on 29th of this month. The speaker has told them that they could come to Parliament House collectively but he would ascertain the nature of the resignation individually in his chamber. The speaker has to be satisfied that the resignation must be under the signature of the member and it should not be obtained through coercion or any other illegal method before accepting it.

 

It would be interesting to watch that member-elect National Assembly from Multan Aamir Dogar, who was elected in the by-election through the PTI support from the berth vacated by Makhdoom Javed Hashmi, would be taking oath as member of the National Assembly a day earlier.