LAHORE: Three-year-old bay colt, Sparks exhibited his bloodline credentials powering to victory in the Fan Tan Cup during the Lahore Winter Meeting at the Racecourse here on Sunday.

Ridden by jockey A. Raza, Sparks, owned by Sarmad Mahmood, beat colt Subah Sadiq by a big margin of distance in the event run over 1,300 metres with top weight mare Unanimous third a length behind. Chestnut colt Hidden Passion completed the frame.

The half-money favourite Sparks was trained by Aleemuddin to score the biggest win during the ongoing Lahore racing season against Subah Sadiq who was ridden by ace jockeyShahid Rehman.

The Fan Tan cup, a class V division II and III combined handicap race was the sixth in racing order.

Later the well-pedigreed colt No Conflict won the main supporting event, the Bhalwal Plate class VI division I and II run over 1,000 metres to give day`s second joy toLahore Race Club (LRC) chairman Tariq Aziz, who was re-elected chairman for the consecutive 14th term in office earlier in the day.

The odds-on favourite No Conflict beat Sher Garh by three lengths with bay mare Vixen third. Chestnut colt Born To Win Again completed the frame.The LRC stewards suspended Imran Pervez for two months for not allowing his mount, Born To Win Again, run on merit in this race.

Jockey M. Hanif and riding boy Sunny Babu shared the day`s racing honours by bringing home two winners each on a day when the favourites swept the card in sevenout of eight races.

Trainer Taugir Ahmed kept on his winning sequence for the sixth day in running when he sent out favourite bay colt New Tear, owned by Najeeb Haider Bagri, in the eighth and last race to end the day`s proceedings in the punters` favour.Tariq re-elected LRC chairman LAHORE: Tariq Aziz was unanimously re-electedchairman of the Lahore Race Club (LRC) for the 14th consecutive term in office at the 89th Annual General Meeting (AGM) of the club held here on Sunday before the start of races.

The panel of ten sitting stewards was also re-elected unanimously.

A breeder, an owner on the world racing circuit and an LRC steward, syed Pervez Hussain complimenting the newly elected panel of LRC stewards said while talking to Dawn that the unanimous election was clear manifestation of the LRC members` confidence in the leadership of Tariq Aziz.

This was evident as the Lahore Race Club members attending the AGM voiced their full confidence and support to Tariq Aziz in all his endeavours.

The AGM also took various decisions relating to the betterment of the equine sports and horse-breeding.

The panel of Lahore Race Club stewards re-elected are: Tariq Aziz (chairman), Malik Hamid Ali Noon, Sheikh Sajjad Hasan, retired Lt Col Masud Pervez, Syed Pervez Hussain, Choudhry Ahmad Saeed, Mohsin Jamil Baig, Arbab Mohammad Zahoor, Azmat Ali Ranjha and Makhdum Syed Ahmad Mahmood.
