In these columns I have been telling you about the unimaginable services rendered to the country by some of my colleagues, amongst others Eng Ejaz Ahmad Khokhar and Dr M Farooq. Here are some anecdotes typical of Khokhar, who was quite a (absent-minded) character.

Farooq and Khokhar once went to China with some colleagues to purchase equipment and materials. They were staying in a hotel from where they would go and see various people. On their way out they had to pass through a glass door at the end of the corridor before reaching the main entrance. Khokhar, ahead of the others, failed to perceive that it was a glass door and walked right through it, shattering the glass in the process without receiving so much as a scratch. A distraught manager came to see what the noise was and demanded damages for the cost of the glass. He would not let Khokhar go before this demand had been met. Ultimately Farooq paid about $28 and Khokhar was ‘released’.

Another similar incident happened at my office building in Kahuta. I had designed the building in a square shape with two rows of offices on the front and both sides. The back consisted of two large halls, one for metallurgy and the other for Dr Ashraf Atta and his deputy, Dr Altaf Hussain, to test and improve centrifuges. The entrance was in the centre of the front and immediately inside the door were two or three uniformed army personnel to check all personnel and goods.

Serving army personnel had been posted in all buildings right from the start of the project. No one and nothing went in or out without proper papers and thorough checking. Once inside this particular building, there were glass doors to the entrances of the left and right wings to protect the halls from dust, heat and cold.

One day Khokhar entered, turned left into the metallurgy section and walked slap bang through the glass door, totally shattering it. I was in my office on the first floor and rushed down to see what the commotion was about, only to find the glass shattered and Khokhar unharmed. He turned to me, somewhat absent-mindedly, and demanded who had put a glass door in such a stupid place. Acknowledging that I was the culprit and explaining the reasoning behind it, he shamefacedly shook his head and wanted to leave, but I asked him to have a cup of coffee with me first. All’s well that ends well!

There’s more to Khokhar. Once, he was very involved with his able colleagues, Dr Tahir Rasul, Eng Saeed Ahmed and Eng Rasheed Ahmed, in assembling an ingeniously designed and built gadget for making the bellows that go in the centre of the centrifuges’ maraging steel tubes. This gadget was a masterpiece of design, hardly 6 feet tall and containing a very high pressure hydraulic pump to make the bellow. Khokhar was constantly getting up and then sitting back down on his haunches. Suddenly there was loud ripping sound – his trouser seam had given way. He rushed off to his office but soon reappeared and Farooq noticed that he had stapled the ripped pieces together. After a few minutes the offending seam again parted ways.

This time Farooq and Saeed went to Khokhar’s office with him, asked him to take off his trousers and wait while they sent it to the tailor for mending. Knowing how absent-minded Khokhar could be, Farooq asked Saeed to lock his office door from the outside so he couldn’t go back to work in his underwear. That’s exactly what he tried to do. Once his trousers were back on, back to work he went and what a wonderful job they did. Had it not been classified information at the time, we could easily have obtained a patent for it in some foreign country and earned a lot of money for it.

Khokhar once went to Germany to check on the Flow Turning Machine used in making all sorts of tubes. Our Procurement Officer, Eng Ikramul Haq Khan, a confirmed bachelor, invited him to stay at his flat. The next morning, while Khokhar was taking a shower, Ikram, who was very particular and liked everything neat and clean, found Khokhar’s bedroom to be in a state of disarray. He immediately made the bed and set things straight. When Khokhar came back he was surprised to see the room tidy and asked who had done it, to which Ikram replied that he had.

The next morning when Khokhar went to take a shower, Ikram again went to his room and was surprised to see that everything was neat and clean. He remarked to Khokhar how neatly he had done the bed, to which Khokhar replied that he had not slept in it. He had taken a cushion from the chair and had slept on the floor so as not to disturb the bed. That was Khokhar!

Tailpiece: Seeing is believing. One of our senior-most bureaucrats, Roedad Khan, went to visit Imran Khan’s container. What I saw and heard on TV was hard to believe. Roedad Khan put his hand on Imran Khan’s shoulder and said: “I see Quaid-e-Azam in Imran Khan”. For God’s sake, Khan Sahib, don’t insult our great leader, Quaid-e-Azam.

Similarly, in a public PPP rally at Quaid-e-Azam’s mausoleum arranged to launch Bilawal, one PPP leader was heard saying that he saw Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in Bilalwal. The gentleman seems in need of a visit to his optician. He obviously could not see the difference between Asif Ali Zardari and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto.

The other day PM Nawaz Sharif was addressing a gathering and said that it hurt him very much to think of the inconvenience and pain felt by the masses due to loadshedding. It seems that you, Mr PM, in order to forget their pain, illuminate your residences in Islamabad and Raiwind and keep them well cooled so that you do not have to even think of loadshedding.