The failure of the idealistic mission to wipe out the democratic system, fund shortage, fatigue caused by the 70-day protest and a suspected deal have impelled Pakistan Awami Tehreek (PAT) chief Dr Tahirul Qadri to schedule visits to Canada, the United States and European countries to recuperate and raise money.

 

His departure from Pakistan will obviously come as a sigh of relief for the Nawaz Sharif government and democracy loving political parties for getting rid of a dangerous irritant. The administration will be in a relatively better position to deal with Dr Qadri’s estranged political cousin, Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) Chairman Imran Khan, who is pursuing the agenda of destabilisation unabated.

 

Reorganisation of the overseas chapters of the PAT as announced by Dr Qadri being the main objective of his foreign visits or lack of it hardly matters in Pakistan’s politics except that their mobilisation will produce funds for him. There are many but not all Pakistani expatriates, who would especially fly into their homeland to cast their votes in elections. In view of this fact, the PAT chief’s stated purpose doesn’t sound convincing.

 

Since he returned to Pakistan in June, he has been engaged in agitational politics and is not known to have ever done anything to reorganize the PAT, which, like many other political parties, revolves around his personality. Evidently, it is the local strength of the party that will really matter in any polls compared to the power of its overseas branches. Had Dr Qadri done its reorganisation at home, his claim to mobilise it abroad would have impressed some people.

 

He has now stated that he would visit Canada or other countries, whether for 100 times, to restore the PAT’s overseas offices and complete other important assignments, such as lectures and events, etc., and will return to Pakistan time to time to address rallies and public meetings. “The PAT’s organizational activities would continue in other countries too for which I would have to travel abroad regularly. No one should have any objection over it as I could go abroad and return as many times I wanted to.”

 

On the face of it, this sums up his whole plan in the wake of botched up sit-in. It means that he would mostly be away from Pakistan and will come back only to speak to major public events organised by the PAT. This proves his detractors right who kept saying that after the end of the present protest, he would leave Pakistan. His lectures and ‘other assignments’ that he takes care of during his foreign stay generate sizable funds for him, and it was because of this money that he undertook a costly adventure like sit-in spanning seventy days.

 

When he announced at his recent Faisalabad public meeting that he needs currency ‘notes’ from his followers, and their votes and support, it became abundantly clear that he has run out of money for spending hefty amount on his protest for a long period. No donations are known to have been made.

 

Although Dr Qadri has repeatedly denied with his usual aggressive oratory and exuberance any deal with the government to wrap up his sit-in, speculation continues to prevail that he agreed to close the shop only after an understanding was reached with him. It was quickly speculated after he unveiled his plan to end the sit-in that he would soon leave for abroad. He himself confirmed on Saturday that he would be visiting different countries in the next few days.

 

His decision to finish the sit-in indeed disappointed most of his followers, but more disgusted were those who were desperate to implement the anti-democracy conspiracy using the protests of Dr Qadri and Imran Khan. As he shut the show, some of them attacked the PAT chief the way saner elements had been scoffing at his adventure for being part of a plot.

 

Apart from the frustration caused to the over ambitious lot, the PAT chief’s decision also poured cold water on Imran Khan’s nightly concert at the D-Chowk. Since its end, the PTI chairman’s sit-in has become exceedingly dull and drab for having very low attendance.

 

However, the termination of the present game doesn’t mean that Dr Qadri will not create a similar alarming scene again. He will definitely adopt this frightening trajectory when he would get an assignment to carry out.

 

The PAT chief’s announcement to take part in the general elections and all by-polls is a welcome move. Nobody either had or will have any objection to his participation in the electoral or other politics like other political parties in a normal peaceful manner. Only his violence-laden politics has been a cause of serious concern. As per this decision, Dr Qadri will field his candidates for the federal and provincial seats to be vacated by the PTI if the resignations of its lawmakers were accepted. 